hey guys welcome back to a guide to
making indie games where each week I
share a bit of what I'm working on as
well as teaching you everything you
should know about designing your own
indie games today I want to show you how
I make isometric tile sets for My Game
reality box we've talked about tile sets
a bunch before but let's do a quick
recap so we're all on the same page here
tile sets are basically the puzzle
pieces of level design making art for
levels is very timec consuming so
instead of drawing everything
individually by hand having a pallet
full of versatile level pieces is a
great way to speed up the process of
making levels previously we made a tile
set for a platformer where each tile
represents a piece of the floor or walls
or background elements but today we're
taking these things a step further with
isometric tiles now a lot of those
lessons from the first tile set we made
will still apply here so I highly
recommend checking out that video first
but with A New Perspective and art style
comes a lot of new rules it's one thing
to draw a two-dimensional world but
turning those drawings into something
that resembles 3D is pretty tricky don't
worry though after today's video I feel
confident that you'll have everything
you need to know before you dive into
making your own isometric Style game but
first hey I'm apox Fox and I make game
design related videos every week if you
learn something new in this video and
want to see more consider subscribing
we'd love to have you so first and
foremost if we want to make an isometric
Style game we have to understand what
that actually means isometric is a
camera perspective that allows you to
create seemingly 3D objects in a 2d
space without a vanishing point what
this means is that no matter where the
camera is positioned all isometric tiles
and objects will always look exactly the
same it's basically forced 3D in a 2d
space every art style has its own
strengths and weaknesses so let's figure
out if isometric is right for you
starting with the strengths isometric is
perfect for grid-based games if you're
making a tactics RPG like myself or
maybe a puzzle game isometric has pretty
much everything you'll need however the
same could be said for standard top-
down perspective which is something to
consider but it's kind of undeniable how
cool it is to see 3D objects represented
in 2D so for me that's the main deciding
factor now time for some of the
drawbacks and these are things you might
not have even considered before starting
an isometric project first of all player
movement can end up being very
restrictive if you're not making a
grid-based game if all the tiles are
diagonal from each other chances are the
player is also moving diagonally which
is very weird to control with arrow keys
or a d-pad of course there are
workarounds for this problem we've seen
it done for games like Hades or tunic
but that calls for either 3D character
models or drawing eight different
directions for the character to move and
I feel like I don't need to explain to
you why that's still kind of a challenge
to pull off not only is the art style
very restrict restrictive for action
games but it's also just harder to make
in general like how can you layer 2D
blocks behind each other how can you set
the correct pivot point so objects and
characters on top of blocks render
correctly I'll show you more of what I
mean when we start actually making the
tiles but it's good to fully understand
what you're getting yourself into either
way I find isometric tiles really fun to
make so let's just start making them
we're going to start by making a
standard block tile every block tile is
made up of three evenly sized diamonds
DS two for the sides and one for the top
the top diamond is what's most important
here that's where the player will stand
and when we start layering those tiles
together the top diamond is pretty much
all that's left over now I'll show you
how to make these blocks the most
important thing I can teach right out of
the gate is what I like to call the
isometric rule of two everything we do
going forward will be based on this rule
so I hope you're paying attention to
make a perfect cube in pixel art we
start by drawing lines like this two
pixels then two pixel pixs then two
pixels then two pixels you get the idea
this line is what we use to create not
only the diamond surface of a block but
also the base at the bottom then we have
the vertical lines which close off the
block and there you go the best way to
think about these two different kinds of
lines is that 2x two lines are for flat
surfaces and the vertical lines
represent Heights the reason we don't
use straight horizontal lines of ones or
lines of three pixels is because the
diamonds don't end up being the same
size which is fine but it's not exactly
isometric but there you go if you draw
each line like this you end up with a
32x32 pixel isometric Cube what I like
to do before anything else is Define a
light source for the block this is
really simple as you can see I decided
the light source would be in the top
left so we use the brightest color for
the top a slightly darker color for the
left side and an even darker shade for
the right after that you can add some
shading and highlights to the outline
and you pretty much have a working tile
set already it might be a little basic
looking but this is really all you need
to start building levels normally we
would make the levels in a game engine
that aligns everything for you but for
the sake of this video I'm just copy and
pasting more blocks you also notice that
when we layer blocks together we still
maintain that rule of Two And this is
essential for making a grid staying
consistent with this rule of 2x two is
probably the most important part of
isometric tile sets if a single block is
one pixel off it will ruin the grid
entirely now that we have one tile done
we can start making variations I started
with a half slab which is literally just
half as many vertical pixels high as a
full block you can also make slope tiles
and these can be a bit inconsistent with
how they slope but as long as the base
is the same dimensions as a regular tile
that still shouldn't be a problem using
all the same rules we went over before
vertical lines being height and diagonal
lines being the block surface you can
make a ton of these variations and
having options like this will make your
levels a lot more versatile I threw
together this small test object just to
show you how all these tiles work
together the main idea here is literally
just to follow your guidelines and
continue the 2 by two pattern you can
stack blocks by placing the base
directly on the tile lines and it's
important to note one of the biggest
challenges of making isometric Arts
which is layering if you want tiles to
not become a jumbled mess you have to
start in the back and work your way
forward you got to remember that these
actually aren't 3D objects these are 2D
drawings so if you want to add something
you have to draw on top of it that's why
pretty much all isometric games make
their levels raise towards the back and
slope down to the front it makes
layering this stuff way easier later
down the road I have to mention again
that this isn't really a problem if
you're making a level with game engine
tools but if you're just drawing
isometric for fun it's just something to
think about so now that you know how to
make the very basics of an isometric
tile sets the only thing we're missing
is detail right now you're watching a
time lapse of me making my own tile set
but I'll explain how I make those
details as we go I decided I wanted to
make a sewer dungeon scene so I just
started with some basic floor tiles to
build off of you'll notice that when I
detail lines on top of the block
everything is that same 2x two pattern
like I said before making isometric tile
sets is really all about following that
pattern through everything you do it's
either 2x two lines or vertical lines to
show height I know I sound like a broken
record but it really is the most
important part of all of this there
actually are some exceptions to this
though you'll see I drew a circle is
shape on one of the tiles curved lines
are very weird to pull off in this
perspective I personally just eyeball it
until it looks okay I did some more
curved lines later so you'll see those
on the walls for like door frames and
stuff like that but yeah similar to what
we were doing before I'm just doing a
whole bunch of shapes that we can use as
building blocks to put the scene
together together and now that it's time
to start actually building the scene I'm
going to say this again it's so
important to find your guidelines in
order to make sure everything lines up
correctly there were multiple times
while making the scene where I had to
redo a big chunk of it because things
didn't actually line up correctly and
you'd be surprised how much one pixel
can change one thing that definitely
helps me is separating the scene by
different layers I had one layer for the
back left side another layer for the
water and a layer for the Pricks in
front of the water you get the idea
similar to the platformer tile set I
made contrast helps a lot when
separating elements of the scene
although the floors and walls are using
the same gray color palette I went a few
Shades Darker for the walls just to make
sure it's easy to separate them and
because I know this is a grid-based game
having a very bright clear floor will be
pretty important later down the line
I'll just remind you that game engines
usually have tools that make isometric
tile sets really easy to use if you're
making a game don't do it the way I'm
doing it right now with within your
pixel art software because you're just
going to end up with a headache and
wasting a lot of time I just wanted to
show you how it works and it's actually
kind of a good way to test out your tile
sets before putting them into your game
but yeah here's the finished scene using
the tile set I made isometric can be
pretty fun especially if you played a
lot with Legos as a kid it definitely
scratches the same part of your brain I
hope this helped you guys get started on
your own isometric tile sets leave a
like or comment to let me know subscribe
to the channel for a new game design
related video video every week next time
we're probably going to start turning
reality box into a working tactics game
so stay tuned for that you should also
join our Discord server with a ton of
other cool developers sharing their own
art and games we'd love to have you and
that's it see you later guys peace